Democrats need to stop infighting 'as quickly as we can': Sen. Whitehouse
Republicans gave Democrats two bad choices, Whitehouse told "This Week."

ByIsabel Danzis
March 16, 2025, 6:54 PM





5:38
Democrats need to stop ‘intramural fighting and bleeding’ quickly: Sen. WhitehouseABC News’ Martha Raddatz interviews Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., on “This Week.”
Democratic Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., said Sunday that Republicans forced Democratic lawmakers to choose between supporting a continuing resolution or a government shutdown, which would have allowed them to further slash the federal government.

Whitehouse told ABC News' "This Week" co-anchor Martha Raddatz that in past shutdowns, the executive branch has advocated for the government to reopen, but President Donald Trump's administration would have taken advantage of one.

“With these MAGA extremists in charge, they don't necessarily want to come out of shutdown, and they have tools in shutdown contingencies and nonessentialness determinations and riffing and things like that that they can use to destroy the government, just like doggy DOGE is doing, except with a veneer of legitimacy, with the authority of shutdown powers,” Whitehouse said in an exclusive interview.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., and nine others in the Democratic caucus voted with Republicans to pass the continuing resolution. Whitehouse voted against it.


Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse speaks with ABC News on This Week.
ABC News
Schumer’s support sparked backlash among Democrats, with many calling for a change in leadership.

MORE: With Democrats' help, Senate votes to avert a government shutdown
Here are additional highlights from Whitehouse’s interview:

On the dangers of shutdown
“When you understand how dangerous a shutdown is, it's even more, sort of, understandable why they would feel that way. And so I think what we need to do is stop the intramural fighting and bleeding as quickly as we can. We are in a fight for our democracy right now, and if we're having a fight in our dugout, we're not out on the field, and the other team is scoring runs.”

On what Democrats need to do
“They were both extremely, extremely dangerous options, and my view is that as Democrats, we need to stop the intramural quarreling about who voted what way and get back to work saving our democracy.”

On Democrats who voted for the continuing resolution
“I think that [Schumer] and the other nine colleagues of mine who made that decision made a very conscientious and principled decision after a lot of reflection. I'm not going to throw any of them under the bus for the choice that they made. When you understand how dangerous a shutdown is, it's even more sort of understandable why they would feel that way.”

On House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries' non-answer on Senate Democrats needing new leadership
"That is not my agenda. That is not a helpful narrative right now. I think that obviously there is a lot of distress, back and forth, between the House and the Senate. That is not unheard of before. And one can read Leader Jeffries' answers as basically, 'Look, move on, I'm not going to dwell on internal infighting among Democrats,' and not necessarily like 'I'm throwing Schumer under the bus.' They've known each other a long time. They're experienced politicians. We need to pull this back together and get back to work."
US PRESIDENT-ELECT Donald Trump will appoint his son-in-law Jared Kushner to the position of senior adviser to the president, two US media outlets have reported.

The appointment of Kushner, reported by NBC and The New York Times on Monday, had been anticipated but it was unclear what his official role would be. The Times reported that his title could be adjusted.

Kushner, who is married to Trump’s eldest daughter, Ivanka, helped guide Trump to victory over Hillary Clinton. Picture: Mandel Ngan/AFP
Kushner, who is married to Trump’s eldest daughter, Ivanka, helped guide Trump to victory over Hillary Clinton. Picture: Mandel Ngan/AFP
Kushner, like Trump, is a major New York-based real estate developer with a wide net of business dealings that could pose potential conflicts of interest. Kushner, who married Trump’s eldest daughter, Ivanka, in 2009, helped guide Trump to victory over Hillary Clinton in the November 8 presidential election.

Kushner, 35, emerged as an important voice early in Trump’s campaign and was involved in almost every aspect of it, from key personnel decisions to strategy and fundraising.

President-elect Donald Trump speaks to the media at Trump Tower on Monday. Picture: AFP
President-elect Donald Trump speaks to the media at Trump Tower on Monday. Picture: AFP
Kushner spearheads his family’s real estate development company, Kushner Companies, and is the publisher of the New York Observer weekly newspaper, which he acquired at age 25.

It was unclear how any Kushner appointment would be affected by a federal anti-nepotism law that prohibits a president from hiring family members to serve in his administration.

Kushner spearheads his family’s real estate development company. Picture: Mandel Ngan/AFP
Kushner spearheads his family’s real estate development company. Picture: Mandel Ngan/AFP
Kushner is working with lawyers on how he would have to divest and distance himself from his family’s business if he were to take a role in the Trump administration, the New York Times reported.
Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau has scrambled to convince Donald Trump to lift tariffs on his country, which together with Mexico and China is one of the US’s largest trading partners.

That effort included a phone call between the two leaders on Wednesday, which appears to have had some effect – on Thursday, Trump exempted Canada from some of the tariffs he had imposed, along with Mexico.

But relations between Trump and Trudeau, who is expected to leave office soon, are tense. The Wall Street Journal has some details of just how tense:

Trudeau responded Tuesday by placing tariffs on the US, and he questioned whether further negotiations would make any difference, accusing Trump of acting in “bad faith.” The two leaders eventually spoke Wednesday morning, an exchange Trump said ended in a “somewhat” friendly manner. A person familiar with the matter said the call grew heated and included profanity.

Share
Updated at 
14.00 GMT
7 Mar 2025
13.39 GMT
US sees slightly less than expected job growth in February
Hiring in the United States remained steady in February, the first full month of Donald Trump’s term, albeit at a rate just under what economists had expected, according to government data.

Employment rose by 151,000 positions last month and the unemployment rate ticked higher by a small amount to 4.1%. Economists had forecast slightly better payroll growth and a flat unemployment rate, but the report was nonetheless a sign that the labor market remained on steady footing.

Whether that will last remains to be seen, as Trump threatens to intensify tariffs on US trading partners, and continues his plans to fire federal employees. Indeed, The data from the labor department showed that one of the sectors that lost the most jobs last month was the federal government.

Share
Updated at 
14.00 GMT
7 Mar 2025
13.16 GMT
Donald Trump will receive the first employment data of his new term at 8.30am, when the labor department releases its jobs report for February.

Hiring has been steady for months, and economists expect that it remained so in February. But surprises are always possible, including those sparked by his campaign to lay off federal workers en masse. Either way, the monthly jobs report is a closely watched sign of economic health, and the White House will no doubt weigh in on it.

Here’s a look back at last month’s release, which covered the transition period between Joe Biden and Trump’s administration:

Share
Updated at 
13.21 GMT
7 Mar 2025
12.51 GMT
Lauren Aratani
Lauren Aratani
Tens of thousands of US federal employees could lose their jobs after the Trump administration moves to reduce the size of the federal workforce dramatically.

With Elon Musk at the helm of the so-called “department of government efficiency” (Doge), which is overseeing efforts to cull federal employment, the White House has embarked on multiple plans to cut down on virtually all areas of federal employment.

There are no official numbers of how many federal employees will be affected, and many of Donald Trump and Musk’s efforts have been stalled in court, but the impact could be big and long-lasting.

To understand what the cuts will do to federal operations, we first have to understand who works for the federal government and what they do. Here’s what we know about the federal workforce.

Share
7 Mar 2025
12.30 GMT
Eric Holthaus
As deadly severe storms swept the US this week, recent Donald Trump administration staffing cuts have left key parts of weather monitoring and disaster preparedness systems severely understaffed, the Guardian has learned.

March typically signals the start of a four-month tornado season across the eastern two-thirds of the US. Last year’s tornado season was one of the most prolific on record, and this year’s tornado season is getting off to an early active start.

A multi-day tornado outbreak tore across several southern states, with significant damage reported near Ada, Oklahoma, including part of an elementary school. Dangerous storms then spread eastward into the Carolinas and the mid-Atlantic. Strong winds in Mississippi killed and injured multiple people in separate incidents.

The period of unsettled weather raised concerns internally among National Weather Service (NWS) meteorologists that the newly downsized agency could be stretched thin.

Share
7 Mar 2025
12.21 GMT
Trump says he sent letter to Iranian leader to negotiate deal
Donald Trump said he wants to negotiate a nuclear deal with Iran and sent a letter to its leadership on Thursday saying he hoped they would agree to talk.

“I said I hope you’re going to negotiate, because it’s going to be a lot better for Iran,” the US president said in the interview with Fox Business Network broadcast on Friday.

“I think they want to get that letter. The other alternative is we have to do something, because you can’t let another nuclear weapon.”

The letter appeared to have been addressed to Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. The White House did not immediately respond to a request about that, Reuters reported.

The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, discussed international efforts to resolve the situation around Iran’s nuclear program with the Iranian ambassador, Kazem Jalali, the Russian foreign ministry said on Friday.

Share
Updated at 
13.23 GMT
7 Mar 2025
11.57 GMT
Lauren Gambino
Lauren Gambino
Gavin Newsom, the Democratic governor of California believed to be eyeing a run for president in 2028, is facing fierce backlash from LGBTQ+ rights advocates after his suggestion that the participation of transgender women and girls in female sports was “deeply unfair”.

In the inaugural episode of his podcast, This Is Gavin Newsom, the governor hosted conservative political activist and Maga darling Charlie Kirk. The co-founder and executive director of the rightwing Turning Point USA, a Phoenix-based organization that operates on school campuses, told Newsom: “You, right now, should come out and be like: ‘You know what? The young man who’s about to win the state championship in the long jump in female sports – that shouldn’t happen.’ You, as the governor, should step out and say: ‘No.’”

The governor responded: “I think it’s an issue of fairness. I completely agree with you on that … it’s deeply unfair.”

Members of his own party in California quickly condemned the comments.

“We woke up profoundly sickened and frustrated by these remarks,” assembly member Chris Ward and senator Caroline Menjivar, of the California legislative LGBTQ+ caucus, said in a statement. “All students deserve the academic and health benefits of sports activity, and until Donald Trump began obsessing about it, playing on a team consistent with one’s gender has not been a problem since the standard was passed in 2013.”

California law has long protected trans youth’s rights to participate in school activities that match their gender.

Share
7 Mar 2025
11.25 GMT
US president Donald Trump said US tariffs could go up over time but gave no other details, according to an excerpt of a Fox Business interview taped on Thursday that aired on Friday.

Asked whether businesses could get clarity about his tariff plan, Trump said:

Well, I think so. But, you know, the terms could go up as time goes by, and they may go up and, you know, I don’t know if it’s predictability.

Share
7 Mar 2025
11.14 GMT
Andrew Roth
Andrew Roth
Staff on hundreds of foreign aid projects left in limbo by the Trump administration’s funding freeze have received a survey that asks them to justify their work under an eccentric list of criteria that meet the White House’s new national security priorities.

The survey, copies of which have been obtained by the Guardian, asks foreign aid programme staff to detail whether they contribute to limiting illegal immigration or securing US borders, “combatting Christian prosecution”,and whether they help the US secure access to rare earth minerals.

It also includes a litmus test on several controversial issues banned under the Trump administration. “Can you confirm this is not a climate or ‘environmental justice’ project or include such elements? [yes/no],” the survey asks. It also asks: “Can you confirm that this is no DEI [diversity, equality and inclusion] project or DEI elements of the project? [yes /no].”

The questionnaire, which was distributed eight weeks after the US president issued a foreign aid funding freeze, comes as thousands of projects have already laid off staff and cut ties with local partners, meaning that even if stop-work orders are lifted the programmes may remain shuttered.

The administration has claimed that it has restored funding for life-saving programmes and has developed a rigorous criteria for reviewing all foreign aid spending. But staff have described a chaotic process or a complete lack of communication with USAid and State Department officials meant to review their programmes.

Share
7 Mar 2025
10.57 GMT
Opening summary: China to continue retaliation against US tariffs
Hello and welcome to the US politics live blog. I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you all the latest news lines over the coming hours.

We start with news that the Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi said China will continue to retaliate against the United States’ “arbitrary tariffs”. Donald Trump is continuing with his action against China despite pausing similar measures against Canada and Mexico.

In a press conference on Friday, Wang said China’s efforts to help the US contain its fentanyl crisis have been met with punitive tariffs, which are straining the ties between the countries.

“No country should fantasise that it can suppress China and maintain a good relationship with China at the same time,” Wang said. “Such two-faced acts are not good for the stability of bilateral relations or for building mutual trust.”

The two countries have been engaging in tit-for-tat retaliatory tariffs since Trump’s return to office in January.

The US has imposed flat tariffs of 20% on all Chinese imports, while Beijing has countered with additional 15% duties on US imports including chicken, pork, soy and beef, as well as expanded controls on doing business with key US companies.

It comes as Trump once again put a central part of his trade war on pause, temporarily exempting from tariffs Mexican and Canadian goods covered by the continental free trade agreement he negotiated in his first term.

However, the president said he was still ready to impose “reciprocal” tariffs on both Canada and Mexico next month.

In other news:

Trump told his cabinet secretaries that they are in charge of hiring and firings at their agencies, not Elon Musk.

The House has voted to censure Democratic congressman Al Green for disrupting Trump’s address to this week’s joint session of Congress. The motion was approved with 224 votes in favor and 198 opposed, with 10 Democrats in support.

In an escalation of his pressure campaign, Trump said the US will not fight for Nato allies who don’t spend enough on their own defense.

US district judge Beryl Howell ruled on Thursday that Donald Trump’s firing of a Democratic member of the National Labor Relations Board was illegal and ordered that she be reinstated to her post.

Axios reports that the state department is hunting for evidence that foreign students who express support for Palestinians under Israeli occupation while studying in the US are “pro-Hamas”, and can have their visas revoked, based on an AI review of their social media accounts.

Trump thanked a reporter for the partisan outlet Breitbart for asking him a friendly question in the Oval Office, which teed him up to attack Democrats. The White House excluded non-partisan reporters from Reuters and the Associated Press to make room for Breitbart and One America News, two pro-Trump outlets.

Trump signed an executive order on Thursday evening to establish a “strategic bitcoin reserve”, a day before meeting with executives from the cryptocurrency industry at the White House.

The Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, who reportedly endured a profanity-laced tirade from Trump, was asked about his foreign minister’s comment that dealing with the US was now “a psychodrama”. “How would you characterize it?” a reporter asked. “Thursday”, Trudeau replied.
Washington
CNN
 — 
President Donald Trump touted his administration’s response to Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico as “an incredible, unsung success” during an Oval Office briefing on the upcoming hurricane bearing down on the Carolinas.

His comments run counter to how many locals and experts have assessed the federal government’s response.

“I think Puerto Rico was incredibly successful,” Trump said, noting that the island location is “tough” during a hurricane due to the inability to transport vital equipment and supplies by truck. “It was one of the best jobs that’s ever been done with respect to what this is all about.”

Earlier this month, the island’s governor formally raised the death toll from the 2017 storm to an estimated 2,975 from 64 following a study conducted by researchers at George Washington University. The study accounted for Puerto Ricans who succumbed to the stifling heat and other aftereffects of the storm and had not been previously counted in official figures. Much of the US territory was without power for weeks.

donald trump aug 1
Related article
Trump touts Puerto Rico response as 'fantastic' despite nearly 3,000 dead

Trump on Tuesday, alongside Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen and Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator Brock Long, said the island’s electric grid had been already “in bad shape.”

The President praised the job FEMA and law enforcement did in Puerto Rico as “an incredible, unsung success.”

San Juan Mayor Carmen Yulín Cruz, who has been a vocal critic of the administration’s handling of the storm, has cast blame on the federal government for failing to provide adequate assistance in the aftermath of the storm, and slammed Trump’s assertion Tuesday.

“In a humanitarian crisis, you should not be grading yourself. You should not be just having a parade of self-accolades. You should never be content with everything we did. I’m not content with everything I did, I should have done more. We should all have done more,” Cruz told CNN’s Anderson Cooper later Tuesday evening.

She continued, “But the President continues to refuse to acknowledge his responsibility, and the problem is that if he didn’t acknowledge it in Puerto Rico, God bless the people of South Carolina and the people of North Carolina.”

Cruz said she spoke with North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper and Wilmington, North Carolina, Mayor Bill Saffo to “just (let) them know, we know how it feels.”

“We know how much they’re going to have ahead of them,” she said.

While the President has frequently praised the government response in the year since the hurricane, others in the administration have acknowledged learned lessons.

Earlier this month, the Government Accountability Office released a report that revealed FEMA had been so overwhelmed with storms by the time Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico that more than half of the workers it was deploying to disasters were known to be unqualified for the jobs they were doing in the field.


San Juan mayor: People died from neglect
01:36
And Long said FEMA had made changes to some of its priorities and procedures.

“We made a lot of changes in real time in addition to the high-level efforts that we learned through our after-action process. Bottom line is, we are concentrating on what we call critical lifelines – health, safety, security. You know, we’ve got food, shelter, health and medical, power and fuel, communications, transportation, hazardous waste,” he told reporters on a conference call on Hurricane Lane preparations last month.

Long continued: “We are hyper-focused on those seven critical lifelines because we realized last year that if any one of those lifelines goes down, then life safety is in jeopardy. And so we’re reorganizing the firepower of the federal government underneath these critical lifelines, we’re pushing forward.”

Trump said Tuesday that Tropical Storm Isaac, which had been downgraded from hurricane status overnight, currently poses a threat to Puerto Rico.

“We do not want to see Hurricane Isaac hit Puerto Rico,” he said.